1. Capacity for Leverage. — Our world teems with useful objects,
natural and artificial, tangible and intangible; leverage describes the
extent to which these objects enable valuable accomplishments that
otherwise would be either impossible or not worth the effort to
achieve. Examples of devices or systems that have a high capacity for
leverage include a lever itself (with respect to lifting physical objects),
a band saw (cutting them), an airplane (getting from one place to another),
a piece of paper (hosting written language), or an alphabet
(constructing words). A generative technology makes difficult jobs
easier. The more effort a device or technology saves — compare a
sharp knife to a dull one — the more generative it is. The greater the
variety of accomplishments it enables — compare a sharp Swiss Army
knife to a sharp regular knife — the more generative it is.

2. Adaptability. — Adaptability refers to both the breadth of a
technology’s use without change and the readiness with which it might
be modified to broaden its range of uses. A given instrumentality may
be highly leveraging, yet suited only to a limited range of applications.
For example, although a plowshare can enable the planting of a variety
of seeds, planting is its essential purpose. Its comparative leverage
quickly vanishes when devoted to other tasks, such as holding doors
open, and it is not readily modifiable for new purposes. The same
goes for swords (presuming they are indeed difficult to beat into plowshares),
guns, chairs, band saws, and even airplanes. In contrast, paper
obtained for writing can instead (or additionally) be used to wrap
fish. A technology that offers hundreds of different additional kinds of
uses is more adaptable and, all else equal, more generative than a
technology that offers fewer kinds of uses. Adaptability in a tool better
permits leverage for previously unforeseen purposes.

3. Ease of Mastery. — A technology’s ease of mastery reflects how
easy it is for broad audiences both to adopt and to adapt it: how much
skill is necessary to make use of its leverage for tasks they care about,
regardless of whether the technology was designed with those tasks in
mind. An airplane is neither easy to fly nor easy to modify for new
purposes, not only because it is not inherently adaptable to purposes
other than transportation, but also because of the skill required to
make whatever transformative modifications might be possible and
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
11 Cf. FREIBERGER & SWAINE, supra note 7, at 200 (describing a combined word processor,
spreadsheet, database, and programming language called Framework as a “remarkably powerful
and advanced product” that “represented a ‘Swiss army knife’ approach” to software design).
1982 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 119:1974

because of the risk of physical injury if one poorly executes such modifications.
Paper, in contrast, is readily mastered: children can learn
how to use it the moment they enter preschool, whether to draw on or
to fold into a paper airplane (itself much easier to fly and modify than
a real one). Ease of mastery also refers to the ease with which people
might deploy and adapt a given technology without necessarily mastering
all possible uses. Handling a pencil takes a mere moment to
understand and put to many uses even though it might require innate
artistic talent and a lifetime of practice to achieve da Vincian levels of
mastery with it. That is, much of the pencil’s generativity stems from
how useful it is both to the neophyte and to the master.

4. Accessibility. — The more readily people can come to use and
control a technology, along with what information might be required
to master it, the more accessible the technology is. Barriers to accessibility
can include the sheer expense of producing (and therefore consuming)
the technology, taxes and regulations imposed on its adoption
or use (for example, to serve a government interest directly or to help
private parties monopolize the technology through intellectual property
law), and the use of secrecy and obfuscation by its producers to maintain
scarcity without necessarily relying upon an affirmative intellectual
property interest.
By this reckoning of accessibility, paper and plowshares are highly
accessible, planes hardly at all, and cars somewhere in the middle. It
might be easy to learn how to drive a car, but cars are expensive, and
the privilege of driving, once earned by demonstrating driving skill,
is revocable by the government. Moreover, given the nature of cars
and driving, such revocation is not prohibitively expensive to enforce
effectively.

5. Generativity Revisited. — As defined by these four criteria,
generativity increases with the ability of users to generate new, valuable
uses that are easy to distribute and are in turn sources of further
innovation. It is difficult to identify in 2006 a technology bundle more
generative than the PC and the Internet to which it attaches.
